Now that we've had
a chance to talk
about worker threads and
the overall structure
of the fork-join
pool with its decks,
the work queues, and so on,
let's zoom in and really focus
in on work stealing.
And work stealing
is, quite frankly,
what differentiates
the fork-join pool
from all the other
types of thread pools
that you get out of
the box with Java
through the thread
pool executor.
Things like fixed size thread
pool or cash thread pool.
As we'll see, the fork-join
pool has magic mechanisms
that are way more powerful
and scalable and complicated,
for that matter, than the other
more civilized and refined
thread pools, if you will.
So remember again, we
want the worker threads
to run until there is absolutely
nothing left for them to do.
So we want the worker threads
to block if, and only if, there
are no tasks left to run.
And one of the consequences
of worker threads blocking
is that if nothing
is available to run,
that can cause the processor
core to go to sleep.
And it turns out if you watch
Doug Lee's excellent talk
here at this YouTube link where
he talks about engineering
concurrent library components,
the reason that you don't want
to block things-- if you can
avoid it-- is because blocking
threads and cores
is prohibitively
expensive on modern
multicore processors.
These things really
want to keep running.
And in fact, if you take a
look at the implementation
of the fork-joint pool, you'll
see this really weird code runs
in the, quote, "idle
loop" of the threads
when they're just kind of
spinning, not doing anything.
And they do all these
bizarre bit wise shifts
and ands and ors and so on.
And the whole point is to
try to fake out the processor
core into thinking something
useful is actually going on.
Because if you just run a
loop that just sits there
in a tight loop, the
underlying hardware
can recognize that nowadays.
It can actually turn around and
put the thread to sleep anyway.
So they do all kinds
of wacky things
to fool the processor into
thinking they're really
doing something useful when
they're actually just spinning
waiting for work to show up.
So therefore, before
a worker thread
that would be potentially
idle actually bites the bullet
and goes to sleep, it will first
check other decks in the pool
to find other tasks to run.
And the whole point
of this is just
to keep the process
running, keep things going.
If you don't have
anything to do,
then go ahead and find
somebody else who does.
And that's why I like to call
this the Jiffy Lube model.
If your buddies
are in another bay
and they've got
something to do and you
have no cars in your
bay, you're not just
going to sit there and browse
the web or text a friend
or read the paper.
You're going to get up
and go over and help them
out and pitch in.
So therefore, these otherwise
idle or potentially idle
worker threads will steal work
from the tail of other threads
decks that are too busy
with their own tasks
to get around to processing
the work that's at their tail.
So again, imagine a world
where we have an empty deck.
It's like the old
joke about someone's
not playing with a full deck.
Well, if we have an empty
deck-- the threads playing with
an empty deck--
then rather than
go to sleep, it'll
look around, find somebody
who's got work to do,
and then go steal work
from the end of their deck.
Now we're going to
talk about why it does
it this way in just a second.
But if you stop
and think about it,
it's a really good reason why
it steals it from the end.
Now before we talk
about the details of how
the stealing takes place,
let's talk about which deck
is stolen from.
And the way that the logic
works in the fork-joint pool
implementation is
that the worker thread
deck to steal from
is selected randomly
by the thread that's
trying to steal.
And this is done to try
to lower contention.
We don't want to have the
thread pools always go
to the same deck each time
because that would become
a single point of contention.
Instead, we want to
spread it around randomly,
and they start at
different places.
Now the way this
works-- if you know
how the implementation works.
I mentioned their is sort
of this big table of decks--
some of which are associated
with individual threads,
some of which are the
ones that are the,
quote, "shared cues" that are
used by the non fork-joint task
clients to put things
into the fork-joint pool.
And so when you start
to steal, you randomly
start at one of these things.
And then you just
start searching down
the table until you happen to
find a deck that has something
in it that you can steal,
which could be coming in
from a non fork-joint task or
could be coming from a deck
from another thread
that owns it.
But it's too busy to
get around to processing
that particular element
in the deck yet,
that particular task
in the deck yet.
The tasks are stolen
in FIFO order.
So keep in mind that a given
worker thread will push and pop
in LIFO order on to and from
its deck with a LIFO model--
Last In, First Out.
However, tasks are
stolen in FIFO order.
So you push things
on to the head.
And then as things
are push, push, push,
they logically
move down the deck
till they end up at the tail.
And when someone comes
along and steals something,
they do this by calling
the poll method--
which will take the item
at the tail of the queue,
not the head of the queue.
So that's what's called First
In, First Out or FIFO ordering.
And the reason for doing
this is really pretty obvious
if you stop to think about it.
This approach, this discipline
of doing things at the tail
rather than at the head,
minimizes contention
with the worker thread that
owns the deck because the worker
thread that owns the deck is
going to be pushing and popping
off the head of the deck and
will be pulling and pulling
things off the tail of the deck.
And that way if there's more
than one entry in the deck,
those two operations can
actually run in parallel.
And they don't have to
share a single lock.
They can actually
have different locks
used for the front, different
locks used for the tail.
And therefore, we can
have a much better chance
of not incurring
synchronization overhead.
It'll just go through
really quickly.
And I'll talk about how
that works in just a second.
Once again, just think
through, you know,
would you have
thought about this
if you were developing
a worker thread pool?
Probably not.
Another reason for
stealing the tale
is that the older
items in the deck
probably constitute a
larger unit of work.
And the reason for this
is because of the divide
and conquer nature of fork-join
tasks, especially those
that work with parallel streams.
If you recall parallel
streams, you typically
start with the
whole data source.
And then you split it in half.
So if you were to think about
pushing a task onto a deck,
the first thing you push on
might be the whole thing.
And then you pop that off.
You break it into two parts.
You push the two halves on.
Then you pick one part off.
You break that in half.
And you push the two fourths on.
And then you pop off one of
the fourths, break it in half,
push the two eighths on,
and so on and so forth.
And what will happen is
you'll end up with a deck
where the bigger items
are towards the tail
and the smaller items
are towards the front.
So therefore, if you
steal from the end,
you'll probably get a
larger unit of work.
And then you can turn around
and use that large unit of work
to further recursively
decompose that
into progressively
smaller chunks.
So it's always better to
start with a big chunk
to break up into parts than
to start with a smaller chunk.
And that may explain
some of the subtleties
that we saw with the way
in which the abstract task
implementation from the
parallel streams framework
would switch back and forth
between doing left-hand side
Spliterator, right-hand
side Spliterator,
forking those things.
And the whole intent was to try
to avoid bias Spliterator that
didn't split things evenly.
Let's take a look at
the work cue deck now.
This is pretty cool.
This is what actually is used
to store the contents that will
be stolen during work stealing.
And the whole point
of this is to try
to minimize lock contention.
So as you can see here,
we've got a couple
of different scenarios.
Push and pop are
only ever called
by the owning worker thread.
So we always push things on
to the front of the queue.
And then we pop things off
the front of the queue.
And that's always done by the
thread that owns the deck.
These methods use compare
and swap operations.
We've talked about compare
and swap operations
in the concurrent
object-oriented programming
class.
These are so-called
weight free operations,
which means that they
will never block.
And they basically just spin.
And this operation
is super fast--
pushing something on,
popping something off really,
really fast.
In contrast, poll
is the method that's
called to try to steal from
another worker threads deck.
So you try to steal it
from another worker thread.
And in this case, you may
not be entirely weight free.
They have to use different data
structures in order to do that.
But the key point to note here
is that the pushing and popping
can be synchronized
with one lock,
and the polling
can be synchronized
with a different lock.
And only if you end up with
a single item in the queue,
is it ever even an issue
as to what gets used.
And of course, they've
accounted for that
in the very clever
implementation under the hood.
If you want to read
more about this really
clever implementation under the
hood, take a look at this paper
that Doug Lee published
a number of years ago.
It's not precisely
what you find with Java
and the Java fork-join pool.
Some of the method names
are a little different.
But it gives you
a very good idea
of how the framework
is designed.
Another great place to go
to get even more information
about the details of how
the fork-join pool source
code works is to take a look
at the implementation overview
comments in the fork-join
pool source code.
So if you go to this
link here, you'll
be able to download the
fork-join pool implementation.
I think this is
the Java 8 version.
You can also use
Google to search
to find the latest
versions, which are also
available in open source form.
And if you go read that
implementation overview
section, it explains--
in gory, gory detail--
how everything works
under the hood.
I only wish that the
rest of the source code
was as thoroughly commented
as the implementation overview
portion.
I think Doug Lee
must have decided
if this code was hard to write,
it should be hard to read.
And so he made it
very impenetrable.
But you can rest assured
it's super duper optimized.
It's about as efficient as you
could imagine Java code to be.
And it takes advantage of lots
of very low level primitives
that come out of the bowels
of the Java libraries.
In particular, things
like the parents
swap operations
that historically
been part of the
Java unsafe class,
which we also talk
about in the earlier
lesson on Java and the
concurrent object-oriented
programming course.
So that basically gives
you a good overview
of how work stealing behaves
in a Java fork-join pool.
The good news is you
don't really have to know,
you don't really have to care
how all these details work.
It's probably interesting
intellectually to know this.
I find it absolutely
fascinating.
It's fun to teach.
It may be fun to learn.
But to use this
framework, you don't
have to be a master
of all these details.
Instead, you can just focus on
using the various subclasses
of fork-join task, like
recursive task and recursive
action, in conjunction with
those non fork-join task
methods defined in
fork-join pool--
like execute submit and invoke--
to get things into the fork-join
pools worker thread pool
where all the wheels
start get setting
in motion and all the stealing
and processing takes place.